---
title: "Explore the significance of Lipinski’s ‘rule of 5’ in drug absorption. What are the key criteria outlined in this rule, and how do they influence the absorption of small molecule drugs? "
tags:
 - biochem-ii
---
Lipinski’s ‘rule of 5’ includes only 4 rules: a molecular weight >500 Daltons, >5 hydrogen bond donors, >10 hydrogen bond acceptors, and a partition coefficient with a log(P) > 5. If these conditions are met, there is a reasonable chance that the small molecule drug will not work well. It may struggle to satisfy the pharmacokinetic requirements set out by ADME (absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion).  

For a successful small molecule drug, it should be a small molecule (<500 Daltons). This allows it to move through the body more freely, improving the absorption and distribution of the drug.  

If a drug has more than 5 hydrogen bond donors, the molecule may struggle to be absorbed and distributed, due to interactions with other molecules (such as water and proteins). Having fewer H-bond donors may allow for more specific binding.  

Having more than 10 hydrogen bond acceptors could also reduce a small molecule drug’s absorption, preventing it from efficiently being taken up.  

If the partition coefficient is too high / low, the drug will not be able to be absorbed. A high partition coefficient would allow a drug to insert into the lipid bilayer of cells, but make it very challenging to remove. Contrary, a low partition coefficient would prevent a drug molecule from ever passing through the membrane. Therefore, a satisfactory balance must be found between the two extremes.  

It must be stressed that not all small molecule drugs satisfy these requirements. There are exceptions to these ‘rules.’ 
