---
title: "What methods can be employed to reduce the misuse of antibiotics?"
tags:
 - Microbiology II
---
To prevent the misuse of antibiotics, it is possible to change legislation to make it more difficult to use these compounds where there is an absence of clinical need. This can reduce the quantity of antibiotics used, but will not completely reduce the risk of resistance developing.  

Prescribing antibiotics for the correct period of time is also important. If they are used for too long, resistance becomes more likely. This would likely require more research into common bacterial infections to determine the optimal prescription length.  

Controlling access to last-resort antibiotics, such as Colistin, could also be used. By ensuring these antibiotics are only used in the direst cases, their activity may be preserved for more time.  

Reducing and banning prophylactic and growth enhancing use in agriculture would reduce the risk of resistance developing in zoonotic bacteria. As demonstrated by Covid, swine flu, and other recent pandemics, it is easy for these pathogens to jump to human populations.  

Public information campaigns to encourage sensible use of antibiotic could also help reduce antibiotic misuse. However, there has been recent research that suggests the efficacy of these is limited – not least due to resistance commonly developing in agricultural settings. 

Educating clinicians on the proper use of antibiotics and improving treatment protocols may also reduce vexatious use.
