---
title: "Explain the different types of mutations and their effects on the final protein product."
tags:
 - Genes, Genomes, and Chromosomes
---
There are several different types of mutation that can occur in DNA:

Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs)
    A single nucleotide polymorphism mutation is where one base is switch for another. These are common within species, where they convey variation between species. 

Point Mutation
    The switching of a single nucleotide for another, of one of two types:
    Transversion - the switching of a pyrimidine for a purine, or vice verse
    Transition - the substitution of bases within the purine / pyrimidine classes of nucleotide, while 

Nonsense
    Point mutation resulting in the premature coding of a STOP codon, almost always leading to a dysfunctional protein product.

Missense
    A mutation arising from changing a single nucleotide, switching the amino acid coded for

Frameshift
    The insertion or deletion of a nucleotide, leading to the reading frame being shifted by a nucleotide - almost always resulting in a dysfunctional protein being produced.

Slip-strand mispairing 
    Type of mutation, typically changing the number of repeat regions, due to the dissociation and re-association of the DNA polymerase during replication. 

Insertion 
    The insertion of a nucleotide, causing a frameshift mutation. 

Deletion
    The removal of a nucleotide, causing a frameshift mutation. 

Transposon
    A mobile genetic element, able to disrupt genes and thus inactivate them.

Homologous Recombination
    A frequent method of increasing genetic variation within a species, by exchanging DNA between chromosomal arms (in the case of crossing-over). This occurs especially so during meiosis, forming gametes. 
