---
title: "Discuss the role of the immune system in distinguishing between self and non-self tissues. How does the immune system react to danger signals from self tissues?"
tags:

gemini-tags:
 - Immunity
 - Self
 - Nonself
 - Recognition
 - Tolerance
 - Autoimmunity
 - DAMPs
 - CD47
 - CD59
 - Macrophages
summary: "The immune system distinguishes between self and non-self through a combination of T/B cell antigen recognition, innate self-cell signaling like CD59 and CD47, and the detection of danger signals like DAMPs, ensuring targeted responses while minimizing autoimmune reactions."
---
Distinguishing between self and non-self tissue is an essential function of the immune system, allowing its action to be targeted to specific tissues. If the immune system could not be targeted, it would cause damage to self-tissue, which would be counter-intuitive and not very useful. 

Non-self tissues are recognised by T and B cell receptors identifying and interacting with non-self antigen. This activates the adaptive immune system, allowing antibodies specific to the pathogenic cells to be secreted, supporting the targeting of the adaptive immune system towards those cells. 
The innate immune system recognises self signaling proteins on self-cells, reducing the likelihood of an autoimmune reaction. CD59, a membrane protein found on self-cells, sequesters complement protein C9 to prevent the formation of the membrane attack complex. This inhibits lysis of self-cells being induced. 
CD47 acts as a ‘don’t eat me signal’ to macrophages. Macrophages will not take up cells expressing this signal. However, some self-cells that have turned pathogenic will have alterations in the expression of proteins like CD47, and these changes can be recognised by the immune system. 

Danger signals from self-tissue can be recognised by the immune system, such as damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs). DAMPs are recognised by NOD-like receptors, an intracellular receptor allowing DAMPs to be recognised and a proportionate immune response to be invoked (eg- through alterations in gene expression, …)