---
title: "What are the main pathways of complement activation?"
tags:
 - Molecular Immunology
gemini-tags:
 - Complement
 - Pathways
 - Immunity
 - Classical
 - Alternative
 - Lectin
 - Activation
 - Convertase
 - C3b
 - C3a
 - Lysis
 - Bacteria
 - Membrane
summary: "The complement system, a crucial part of the immune response, is activated via three distinct pathways – classical, MB-lectin, and alternative – all converging to form C3 convertase, ultimately leading to the formation of the membrane attack complex and pathogen lysis."
---
There are three pathways to activate the complement system: the classical pathway, the alternative pathway, and the MB-lectin pathway. 
The classical pathway was the first to be discovered, involving the formation of C3 convertase to produce the biologically active C3b and C3a. Antibody binding to pathogen is one method of producing C3 convertase. The C3 convertase is formed of C4bC2a. These C4b and C2a molecules are produced from the cleavage of C1 and C2 by C1 and MASP2. C3b then triggers the rest of the complement pathway. 
The MB-lectin binding pathway is dependent on lectin binding to mannose, a sugar found only in bacterial cells. Once the lectin binds to mannose, C3 convertase is produced (by the same process as the classical pathway), and the complement system activated. 
The alternative pathway has a different way of activating. It uses a different C3 convertase - C3bBb. This convertase is constantly produced through a tickover mechanism, allowing it to rapidly increase the production of C3 convertase. C3 is broken down into B3a and C3b, with C3b binding to the bacterial membrane. Factor B binds to C3b, before being cleaved by Factor D into Bb. This leaves C3bBb on the bacterial membrane, which is stabilised by Factor P, also called properdin. This then leads to the activation of complement through the common pathway used in the classical and MB-lectin binding pathways. 
After C3 convertase forms C3b, C5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 are produced through the complement pathway. C9 catalyses into the membrane attack complex, forming pores in Gram-negative bacteria leading to lysis.