---
title: "Describe the historical contributions of scientists like Jenner, Koch, and Pasteur in the discovery of the immune system. How did their work impact the field of immunology?"
tags:

gemini-tags:
 - Immunology
 - Vaccination
 - GermTheory
 - Pasteurization
 - Scientists
summary: "Jenner, Koch, and Pasteur made foundational contributions to immunology through vaccination, germ theory, and pathogen attenuation, respectively, paving the way for future advancements in the field."
---
Jenner, Koch, and Pasteur were involved in discovering the fundamentals of immunology.

Edward Jenner popularised the principle of vaccination, using the less serious infection of cowpox to convey immunity to the deadly smallpox. Protecting patients against smallpox saved millions of lives, and led to smallpox being declared eradicated by the WHO in the 1970s. 

Robert Koch created ‘germ theory’ — a series of postulates defining bacteria. To satisfy Koch’s postulates:
An infection is taken from an infected organism
The infectious agent is cultured in a pure culture, in vitro
An uninfected and healthy organism has the cultured agent introduced. The same infection as the originating organism must occur
The original infectious agent can then be reisolated form the new organism, and the same properties identified.
However, these postulates have a number of shortcomings - it is not possible to culture many organisms, making it impossible to get past stage 2. 
Some pathogens are opportunistic, exploiting a weakness in the host. This might not be possible where the second host is healthy and unable to induce infection (eg- Staphylococcus aureus). 

Louis Pasteur developed the concept of pasteurisation. Pasteur also developed a method of reducing the virulence of pathogens, through the process of serial passaging. By culturing the pathogen of interest, especially at conditions atypical to the environment the pathogen normally infects, it is possible to mutate the pathogen to reduce its virulence on introduction to the endogenous host. 
In the case of Anthrax, Pasteur developed a successful vaccine for cattle, helping protect agricultural populations. Pasteur also attempted to develop a cholera vaccine, although this is now thought to have been ineffective. 

The work of these scientists provided the foundations of the field of immunology, and laid the frameworks from which all future development was built upon.