---
title: "Discuss the role of barriers in the innate immune system and how they protect the body from pathogens."
tags:

gemini-tags:
 - Immunity
 - Barriers
 - Mechanical
 - Chemical
 - Cilia
 - Junctions
 - Lysozyme
 - Acids
 - Mucins
 - Protection
 - Innate
summary: "The innate immune system utilizes mechanical and chemical barriers, such as cilia, tight junctions, lysozyme, and mucins, to physically and chemically prevent pathogens from entering the body and causing infection."
---
Barriers are an essential component of the innate immune system, preventing the entry of pathogens to reduce the chance of an infection developing. 
Barriers can be divided into 2 main categories: mechanical and chemical. Mechanical barriers include cilia or tight junctions in epithelial cells - anything that physically prevents a pathogen from entering the host. Chemical barriers are secreted components, inhibiting the growth of a pathogen to prevent it from becoming a problem. For example, lysozyme, acidic fatty acids, and mucins are all chemical barriers to infection. 

Mechanical
Cilia are an important mechanism for protecting vulnerable mucosal surfaces from infection. These fine projections from ciliated epithelial cells are able to ‘waft’ mucus away from the most vulnerable areas, taking pathogens with it. 
Tight junctions are also found in mucosal surfaces, forming an impermeable boundary between the external and internal environments. This makes it harder for pathogens to invade across membranes, increasing the likelihood a pathogen will pass through the GI tract or be shed from the skin. 

Chemical
Lysozyme, an enzyme catalysing the degradation of peptidoglycan, is secreted onto areas of the body that are likely to be areas a pathogen can enter. Breaking down this essential component of bacterial cell walls, causing lysis, before the bacteria is able to enter the body / grow on the surface, reduces infection risk. 
Keratinised epithelial cells contain acidic fatty acids, making the skin have pH 4-5. Although this isn’t strongly acidic, it is sufficient such that pathogens are inhibited from growing on the surface. Some bacteria are able to grow on the surface of the skin, such as Staphylococcus aureus, and these are generally commensal (S. aureus can be an opportunistic pathogen; it’s also found on ~⅓ of the human population’s skin.
Mucins are secreted components found in pulmonary surfactant, preventing the penetration of bacteria due to its gel-like consistency.