---
title: "Discuss the significance of the different subsets of CD4 positive T cells in mounting an effective immune response."
tags:
 - Molecular Immunology
gemini-tags:
 - Tcells
 - Immunity
 - Helper
 - Cytotoxic
 - Regulatory
 - TH1
 - TH2
 - TH17
 - TFH
 - Inflammation
 - Macrophages
 - Eosinophils
 - Neutrophils
 - Antibodies
 - Apoptosis
summary: "Different CD4+ T cell subsets, along with cytotoxic T cells, orchestrate a coordinated immune response by activating various immune cells, regulating inflammation, supporting antibody production, suppressing the immune response after infection, and directly killing infected cells."
---
Different types of CD4+ T cells (helper/effector T cells) are vital for regulating an effective immune response. 

TH1 cells activate macrophages, recruiting them to the site of infection for phagocytosis of the pathogen. 

TH2 cells recruit eosinophils and mast cells, inducing localised inflammation at the site of infection. This can improve the efficacy of the immune system, as some immune cells are more effective at a slightly elevated temperature, and supports chemotaxis towards the infection. TH2 cells are also important for B cell class switching. 

TH17 activates epithelial cells and fibroblasts, causing localised inflammation. This recruits neutrophils by chemotaxis. 

Follicular helper T cells (TFH) support the development of B cells into plasma and memory cells. This enables efficient antibody synthesis, and the memory component of adaptive immunity to occur. 

T regulatory cells (Treg) are important for suppressing the immune response after infection, allowing the termination of the immune response. This is important in preventing immune responses from damaging self tissues. 

Cytotoxic T cells (TC) are able to directly kill infected cells through the secretion of granzymes and perforin. Perforin forms pores (perforations) in the target cell’s membrane, and the granzymes induce apoptosis through the caspase cascade. TC can also induce Fas clustering, which also leads to activation of the caspase cascade. This results in a ‘clean’ death where no intracellular pathogen or material is released.