---
title: "What are the key differences between passive and active immunity, and how do they function in the immune response?"
tags:
 - Molecular Immunology
gemini-tags:
 - Immunity
 - Passive
 - Active
 - Antibodies
 - Vaccination
 - Opsonization
 - Agglutination
 - Infection
 - Immunotherapy
summary: "Passive immunity, a short-term defense acquired from external sources like breast milk or injections, differs from long-lasting active immunity, which arises from the body's own response to a pathogen or vaccine, and aids in immediate immune responses by recruiting immune cells and marking pathogens."
---
Passive immunity is short-lived immunity conveyed from an exogenous source. This could include antibodies delivered through breast milk, or a monoclonal antibody injection. Passive immunity can be subdivided into two categories: natural and artificial, depending on the source of the antibodies. 

Passive immunity can help recruit immune cells to an infection. Antibody binding to antigen can mark a cell as pathogenic, through the process of opsonisation. Antibodies can cause pathogenic cells to clump together (agglutination), which makes phagocytosis more likely). This recruits cell-mediated and humoral immunity (eg- complement system) to the site of infection. Passive immunity can be useful where the patient’s immune system is yet to develop, such as in babies, or where the immune system is not functioning as intended (eg- cancers, systemic infections, toxins). This enables the manipulation of immune responses and supports the resolution of the infection. Antibodies can be developed against specific transport proteins, allowing cells to be ‘starved’, killing cells solely with the use of the antibody. 

Active immunity is long-lived, involving the patient’s immune system being exposed to the pathogen (or a pathogen-analogue) to develop memory cells against that antigen. This can create immunity that lasts the entire lifetime of the patient. 

Active immunity can be developed either through infection by a pathogen, or by vaccination.