---
title: "How do mRNA vaccines differ from traditional vaccines in terms of development and immune response?"
tags:
 - Molecular Immunology
gemini-tags:
 - mRNA
 - vaccines
 - technology
 - advantages
 - safety
 - development
 - speed
 - immunity
 - innovation
summary: "mRNA vaccines offer a faster, safer, and more effective alternative to traditional vaccines by delivering genetic instructions for antigen production within the body, bypassing the need for time-consuming and potentially risky lab processes."
---
mRNA vaccines differ from traditional vaccines by delivering only the genetic material for an antigen from the pathogen of interest, allowing that protein (which could also be described as a subunit) to be expressed in vivo in the patient.

It is much faster to develop mRNA vaccines, as their design is almost entirely computational. Once a sequence has been developed, it is synthesised, combined with other components to improve stability and lifespan, before being packaged. 
Contrastingly, traditional vaccines require time consuming lab-based processes like serial passaging and genetic engineering (in the case of attenuated vaccines) and inactivation (in the case of inactivated pathogen vaccines). Both of these processes can go wrong, with either the pathogen refusing to evolve away from its normal growth conditions, or the inactivation process failing. Notably, a batch of ‘inactivated’ polio vaccines were not inactivated correctly, causing the recipients of these doses to be injected with live poliovirus. This is not ideal. 

mRNA vaccines do not contain any pathogenic components, eliminating the risk of administering a live pathogen to the patient. This makes them much safer. Compared to other types of subunit vaccine, mRNA vaccines elicit a stronger immune response without the need for additional components like adjuvants. This makes them quicker and easier to develop and distribute, which is vital during disease outbreaks.