---
title: "What are the key differences between polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies in terms of specificity and production methods?"
tags:
 - Molecular Immunology
gemini-tags:
 - Antibodies
 - Polyclonal
 - Monoclonal
 - Immunization
 - Therapy
 - Hybridoma
 - Epitope
 - Serum
 - In-vitro
 - Engineering
summary: "While polyclonal antibodies were historically used, monoclonal antibodies, produced through in vitro techniques, offer improved specificity, efficiency, and reduced risks, making them the preferred choice for antibody therapy."
---
Polyclonal antibodies were the original form of passive immunisation. By exposing an animal to the antigen of interest and extracting serum from blood, the serum can be administered to a patient. However, as this serum is from an animal, it is possible for many other antibodies to be formed – these may interact with other epitopes or antigens, especially where a non-sterile animal is used to synthesise polyclonal antibodies. These are less used today due to the elevated risk of serum sickness, and improvements in in vitro techniques.

Monoclonal antibodies are a form of antibody therapy that contains antibodies recognising a single epitope. To obtain these monoclonal antibodies, in vitro methods are used: by fusing a plasma cell with a cancerous B cell, a hybridoma cell is formed. The hybridoma cell is immortal, allowing high levels of the antibody of interest to be obtained. The antibody can either be isolated by screening B cells in vivo and selecting for the B cell of interest, or by engineering a B cell. Engineering the complementarity determining sequences (CDRs), binding specificity can be modified. In vitro synthesis of monoclonal antibodies is much faster and more efficient than polyclonal antibodies. Different combinations of monoclonal antibodies can be combined into a cocktail, allowing different epitopes to be targeted in a single administration.