---
title: "Analyse the potential future developments in monoclonal antibody therapies for Covid and their expected challenges."
tags:
 - Molecular Immunology
gemini-tags:
 - Antibodies
 - Monoclonal
 - Therapeutics
 - Immunotherapy
 - Drugs
 - Treatment
 - Design
 - Engineering
 - Cocktails
 - Delivery
summary: "Monoclonal antibodies (Mabs) offer rapid development and targeted delivery for treating infectious diseases and other conditions through mechanisms like rational design, drug conjugation, and antibody cocktails."
---
Monoclonal antibodies (Mabs) are antibodies that are expressed in vitro against a target antigen. This is especially useful against infectious diseases that do not have existing drugs, such as pathogens that cause outbreaks (eg- Covid, SARS, MERS, …). 

Mabs can be quickly developed and authorised through emergency use mechanisms, allowing them to be used clinically much more quickly than other classes of therapeutics (eg- small molecule drugs, vaccines, …). 

Development of plasma cells for fusion with cancerous B cells to form a hybridoma cell could be accelerated by using rational design of the complementarity determining regions (CDRs) of the variable gene segment in the antibody section of the genome. By designing these to interact specifically with the target epitope, more efficient antibodies could be developed quicker. This could also have the benefit of improving immunogenicity, as well as allowing proteins that are less likely to mutate to be targeted. 

Mabs can also be developed to deliver drug molecules in a highly targeted fashion. By conjugating antibody with small molecule drugs, concentrations of the small molecule drug can be reduced, making side effects less likely. 

Antibody cocktails combine several different Mabs into a single dose, allowing different epitopes to be targeted. This makes the antibody drug more effective, reducing the impact of individual mutations on the overall efficacy of the drug.